# Working with containers

Docker implements the Open Container Initiative (OCI) specifications.


## Containers – The TLDR
Containers are run-time instances of images, and you can start one or more containers from a single image.

The shared image is read-only, but you can write to the containers. 
You can start, stop, restart, and delete containers They’re also designed to be stateless and ephemeral.

Containers are also designed to be immutable. This means you shouldn’t change them after you’ve deployed them — if a container fails, you replace it with a new one instead of connecting to it and making a live fix.


Containers should only run a single process and we use them to build microservices apps. 



## Containers vs VMs

- VMs virtualize hardware
- Containers virtualize operating systems

In the VM model, you power on a server and a hypervisor boots. When the hypervisor boots, it claims all hardware resources such as CPU, RAM, storage, and network adapters. To deploy an app, you ask the hypervisor to create a virtual machine. It does this by carving up the hardware resources into virtual versions, such as virtual CPUs and Virtual RAM, and packaging them into a VM that looks exactly like a physical server. Once you have the VM, you install an OS and then an app.

In the container model, you power on the same server and an OS boots and claims all hardware resources. You then install a container runtime such as Docker. To deploy an app, you ask Docker to create a container. It does this by carving up OS resources such as process trees and filesystems into virtual versions and then packaging them as a container that looks exactly like a regular OS. You then tell Docker to run the app inside the container.



hypervisors perform hardware virtualization where they divide hardware resources into virtual versions and package them as VMs. Container runtimes perform OS virtualization where they divide OS resources into virtual versions and package them as containers. 


### The VM tax

the biggest problems with the virtual machine model is that you need to install an OS on every VM — every OS consumes CPU, RAM, and storage and takes a relatively long time to boot.

Containers get around all of this by sharing a single OS on the host they’re running on. 


!!! note ""
    Most container engines and platforms implement sensible defaults for security-related technologies such as SELinux, AppArmor, seccomp, capabilities, and more. You can even configure these to make containers more secure than VMs


## Images and Containers

The image is read-only, but each container is read-write. Docker accomplishes this by creating a thin read-write layer for each container and placing it on top of the shared image. 

The containers can see and access the files and apps in the image through their own R/W layer, and if they make any changes, these get written to their R/W layer. When you stop a container, Docker keeps the R/W layer and restores it when you restart the container. However, when you delete a container, Docker deletes its R/W layer. This way, each container can make and keep its own changes without requiring write access to the shared image.



!!! info ""
    If you’re running on Linux, you’ll need to ensure your user account is a member of the local docker Unix group. If it isn’t, you can add it by running usermod -aG docker <username> and restarting your shell. Alternatively, you can prefix all docker commands with sudo. Your account needs to be a member of the docker group so it can access the API, which is exposed on a privileged local Unix socket at /var/run/docker.sock. It’s also possible to expose the API over the network.


## How containers start apps

